
BIG DATA FOR
EPIDEMIOLOGY: APPLIED
DATA ANALYSIS USING
NATIONAL HEALTH
SURVEYS
TIFFANY B. KINDRATT
PEACE OSSOM-WILLIAMSON
Mavs Open Press
Arlington
Big Data for Epidemiology: Applied Data Analysis Using National Health
Surveys by Tiffany B. Kindratt is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS
About the Publisher
Mavs Open Press
vii
About This Project ix
Acknowledgments xii
1. Introduction 1
2. Overview of National Health Surveys 10
3. Literature Review 22
4. Basic Data Analysis 36
5. Complex Survey Design Features 60
6. National Health Interview Survey 79
7. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 109
8. Health Information National Trends Survey 138
9. Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System 162
10. National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey
188
11. Dissemination 213
12. Conclusions 245
Links by Chapter 267
Image Credits 271
ABOUT THE PUBLISHER
MAVS OPEN PRESS
ABOUT MAVS OPEN PRESS
Creation of this resource was supported by Mavs Open
Press, operated by the University of Texas at Arlington
Libraries (UTA Libraries). Mavs Open Press offers no-
cost services for UTA faculty, staff, and students who
wish to openly publish their scholarship. The Libraries’
program provides human and technological resources
that empower our communities to publish new open
access journals, to convert traditional print journals to
open access publications, and to create or adapt open
educational resources (OER). Our resources are openly
licensed using Creative Commons licenses and are
offered in various e-book formats free of charge, which
can be downloaded from the Mavs Open Press OER
catalog. Optional print copies of this text may be available
through the UTA Bookstore or can be purchased directly
from XanEdu, Mavs Open Press’ exclusive print provider
and distributor.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY VII
ABOUT OER
OER are free teaching and learning materials that are
licensed to allow for revision and reuse. They can be
fully self-contained textbooks, videos, quizzes, learning
modules, and more. OER are distinct from public
resources in that they permit others to use, copy,
distribute, modify, or reuse the content. The legal
permission to modify and customize OER to meet the
specific learning objectives of a particular course make
them a useful pedagogical tool.
ABOUT PRESSBOOKS
Pressbooks is an open source, web-based authoring tool
based on WordPress, and it is the primary tool that Mavs
Open Press uses to create and adapt course materials.
Pressbooks should not be used with Internet Explorer.
The following browsers are best to use with Pressbooks:
• Firefox
• Chrome
• Safari
• Edge
CONTACT US
Information about open education at UTA is available
online. Contact us at oer@uta.edu for other inquires
related to UTA Libraries publishing services.
VIII TIFFANY B. KINDRATT
ABOUT THIS PROJECT
OVERVIEW
National data sets provide an avenue for students to
practice data analytic skills while also answering
meaningful research questions. This open education
resource was developed to train future public health
professionals how to conduct secondary data analysis of
national health surveys using SAS statistical software.
SAS software was selected because it is one of the most
commonly used software programs used among public
health departments and academia. The book includes
details on how to analyze public-use data from five
common national health surveys, including the National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS), Medical Expenditure
Panel Survey (MEPS), Health Information National
Trends Survey (HINTS), Behavior Risk Factor
Surveillance System (BRFSS) and National Health and
Nutrition and Examination Survey (NHANES). All
datasets and corresponding syntax files are available from
the Open ICPSR Data Repository (https://doi.org/
10.3886/E172301V1). Future steps are to provide
databases and syntax files for other analytic software,
specifically STATA.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY IX
CREATION PROCESS
The creation of this textbook began in March 2020. Due
to COVID-19 pandemic challenges on teaching and
research in higher education, final production was
delayed. Chapters 1-8 were piloted during Spring 2021
and Chapters 1-6 and 9-12 were piloted in Spring 2022
to Master of Public Health students enrolled in KINE
5386 Big Data for Epidemiology. Revisions were ongoing
throughout the development process. Any corrections
from the Spring 2021 pilot were made prior to the Spring
2022 pilot. Efforts are underway for additional reviews to
be completed by a consultant, Peace Ossom-Williamson,
MLA.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Tiffany B. Kindratt, PhD, MPH, is an assistant professor
in the Public Health Program, Department of
Kinesiology, College of Nursing and Health Innovation
at the University of Texas at Arlington. She is Director
of the Health Survey Research Laboratory and conducts
research focused on predisposing (e.g. race/ethnicity,
specifically Arab/Middle Eastern and North African) and
enabling (e.g. patient-provider communication, patient
experiences) factors that influence individuals’ health
behaviors, morbidity, mortality and use of health services
across the life course using big data methodologies. She
has an extensive background in epidemiologic and large
database analysis, Arab/Middle Eastern and North
African American health disparities, and training of
medical learners. She has 13 years of experience
analyzing large databases and complex surveys, including
those included in this book. She currently has federal
X TIFFANY B. KINDRATT
research funding from the National Institutes of Health
(National Institute on Aging) and Health Resources and
Services Administration and has over 50 manuscripts
published in peer reviewed scientific journals.
BIG DATA FOR EPIDEMIOLOGY XI
